.. _release-v2.0.0:

==========================
What's New in Version 2.0
==========================

Version 2.0 reworks the core data structures around a single symmetry-blocked
storage model, consolidates the wavefunction containers, and standardizes the
fermion-to-qubit mapping workflow. Building on those foundations, it adds nuclear
gradients and Hessians, more robust SCF convergence, and a broader set of
quantum-simulation primitives.

Most v1 code keeps working through tested facades and deprecated aliases; the
:ref:`Breaking changes and migration <v2-breaking-changes>` section covers the
cases that need changes and the new APIs that replace them.

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :depth: 1


Highlights
==========

- **Symmetry-blocked storage.** Orbital coefficients and energies, Hamiltonian integrals, and index sets share one symmetry-blocked representation, so restricted and unrestricted data use the same accessors.
- **Consolidated wavefunction containers.** The five v1 containers collapse into :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.StateVectorContainer` and :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AmplitudeContainer`.
- **Nuclear gradients and Hessians.** A new nuclear-derivative algorithm returns energies, gradients, and optionally a Hessian and the converged wavefunction.
- **More robust SCF.** A stabilized SCF solver follows internal and external instabilities to a stable reference, and :term:`ROHF` gains geometric direct minimization.
- **New simulation primitives.** Block-encoding / :term:`LCU` qubitization, the Hadamard test, Zassenhaus product formulas, and real-time dynamics for driven Hamiltonians join the existing Trotter-Suzuki builders.
- **Fermion-to-qubit mapping as data.** Encodings are carried by :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.MajoranaMapping`, including a Verstraete-Cirac local encoding.
- **Explicit term grouping and expectation estimation.** Pauli grouping is now an opt-in ``term_grouper`` step, and the estimator generalizes to any :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator`.


Symmetry-Blocked Storage
========================

Orbital coefficients and energies, Hamiltonian integrals, and index sets are now
backed by symmetry-blocked containers
(:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.symmetry.SymmetryBlockedTensorRank2`,
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.symmetry.SymmetryBlockedTensorRank1`, and
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.symmetry.SymmetryBlockedIndexSet`). Each block
carries its spin (and, in general, other single-particle symmetries) explicitly,
so one representation serves both restricted and unrestricted data.

The v1 dense accessors on :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Orbitals` remain available
as tested facades over this storage, but now emit a ``DeprecationWarning``. See
:ref:`Migrating Orbitals accessors <v2-migrating-orbitals>` for the replacement
API.


Consolidated Wavefunction Containers
====================================

The five v1 wavefunction containers were merged into two. The single-determinant,
complete-active-space, and selected-configuration-interaction containers are now
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.StateVectorContainer`, and the Møller-Plesset and
coupled-cluster containers are now :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AmplitudeContainer`.
A wavefunction now records the physical *sector* it describes, so containers of
the same type are distinguished by their contents rather than by their class.

The removed names remain importable as deprecated aliases, and
:meth:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Wavefunction.get_container_type` now returns
``"state_vector"`` or ``"amplitude"`` instead of the former ``"sd"`` / ``"cas"`` /
``"sci"`` / ``"mp2"`` / ``"cc"`` strings. See
:ref:`Consolidated container names <v2-container-rename>` for the mapping.


Nuclear Gradients and Hessians
==============================

A new ``nuclear_derivative_calculator`` algorithm computes nuclear derivatives of
the electronic energy directly from a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Structure`.
Two variants are available: an analytic ``qdk`` path built on the internal
:term:`SCF` gradients, and a ``qdk_finite_difference`` path that evaluates
central differences and can additionally assemble a Hessian.

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/examples/python/release_notes_v2_0.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # start-cell-nuclear-derivatives
   :end-before: # end-cell-nuclear-derivatives

The call returns the energy, the nuclear gradients, and optionally a Hessian and
the converged wavefunction.


Stabilized SCF and ROHF Direct Minimization
============================================

A stabilized :term:`SCF` solver wraps an inner solver and a stability checker:
after convergence it tests the wavefunction for internal and external
instabilities, rotates the orbitals along any instability direction, and re-runs
until the reference is stable or an iteration limit is reached.

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/examples/python/release_notes_v2_0.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # start-cell-stabilized-scf
   :end-before: # end-cell-stabilized-scf

Its behavior is controlled through settings (which stability checks to run, the
iteration limit, and how to follow an external instability).

The :term:`QDK` :term:`SCF` backend also gains geometric direct minimization
(:term:`GDM`), including a :term:`DIIS`-to-GDM hybrid path, for
:term:`ROHF` references that are difficult to converge with :term:`DIIS` alone.


New Simulation Primitives
=========================

Several new primitives complement the existing Trotter-Suzuki time-evolution
builders.

**Block encoding / LCU.** A linear-combination-of-unitaries (:term:`LCU`) builder
produces a PREPARE-SELECT block encoding of a Hermitian
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator`, and can wrap it as a qubitization walk
operator for phase estimation:

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/examples/python/release_notes_v2_0.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # start-cell-lcu
   :end-before: # end-cell-lcu

**Hadamard test.** The ``hadamard_test`` algorithm (``create("hadamard_test", "qdk")``)
maps a target :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.UnitaryRepresentation` into a controlled
circuit and returns the measurement data for an overlap or expectation value.

**Zassenhaus product formulas.** A Zassenhaus builder expands the time-evolution
operator with higher-order commutator corrections; the step count is set with
``num_divisions`` or selected from a ``target_accuracy``:

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/examples/python/release_notes_v2_0.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # start-cell-zassenhaus
   :end-before: # end-cell-zassenhaus

**Real-time dynamics.** Driven, time-dependent Hamiltonians
(:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.TimeDependentQubitHamiltonian`) can be evolved with the
Euler evolution-circuit builder (``evolution_circuit_builder`` / ``euler``) and a
first-order Magnus propagator (``propagator`` / ``magnus``); a companion
``hamiltonian_simulation`` / ``euler_integrator`` measures observables on the
evolved state. See
`examples/time_evolve_and_measure.ipynb
<https://github.com/microsoft/qdk-chemistry/blob/v2.0.0/examples/time_evolve_and_measure.ipynb>`_
and `examples/estimation_ising_2d.ipynb
<https://github.com/microsoft/qdk-chemistry/blob/v2.0.0/examples/estimation_ising_2d.ipynb>`_.


Fermion-to-Qubit Mapping as Data
================================

Fermion-to-qubit encodings are now first-class data. A
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.MajoranaMapping` describes how fermionic Majorana
operators map to Pauli strings, and is passed to the qubit mapper at ``run()``
time instead of selecting an encoding by string:

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/examples/python/release_notes_v2_0.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # start-cell-majorana-mapping
   :end-before: # end-cell-majorana-mapping

Built-in constructors cover Jordan-Wigner, Bravyi-Kitaev, Bravyi-Kitaev tree,
parity, and symmetry-conserving Bravyi-Kitaev encodings, plus a new
**Verstraete-Cirac** local encoding built from a
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.LatticeGraph` for lattice models. The
:term:`QDK` mapper dispatches to specialized native paths for sparse
(lattice-model) and Cholesky-factorized Hamiltonians, avoiding dense four-center
expansion without changing results. See
:ref:`Fermion-to-qubit mapping <v2-qubit-mapping>` for the migration from the v1
encoding-string workflow.


Term Grouping and Expectation Estimation
========================================

Pauli-term grouping is now an explicit ``term_grouper`` algorithm rather than an
implicit step inside the estimator. A grouper attaches a
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.TermPartition` (a
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.FlatPartition` or
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.LayeredPartition`) to a
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator` for downstream consumers:

.. literalinclude:: ../_static/examples/python/release_notes_v2_0.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # start-cell-term-grouper
   :end-before: # end-cell-term-grouper

Built-in variants are ``qubit_wise_commuting``, ``commuting``, and ``identity``
(one term per group); a NetworkX plugin adds graph-coloring variants. The
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.ExpectationEstimator` (registry key
``"expectation_estimator"``) estimates the expectation value of any
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator` from the grouping it is given;
pre-group its input to recover the grouping v1 applied automatically.


Other Improvements
==================

- **Composable phase estimation.** Standard and iterative :term:`QPE` split into a reusable circuit builder and executor, composed via nested algorithm references; the builder can also generate circuits on its own for resource estimation (``create("qpe_circuit_builder", "qdk_iterative")``). See `examples/qpe_stretched_n2.ipynb <https://github.com/microsoft/qdk-chemistry/blob/v2.0.0/examples/qpe_stretched_n2.ipynb>`_.
- **Natural-orbital localizer.** ``orbital_localizer`` / ``qdk_natural_orbitals`` diagonalizes the active-space one-particle :term:`RDM` to produce occupation-ordered natural orbitals.
- **Cholesky MO integrals persisted.** Cholesky Hamiltonians now serialize their :term:`MO` three-center integrals, so factorized Hamiltonians round-trip without expanding to dense tensors.
- **Declarative algorithm nesting.** An algorithm can hold sub-algorithms as declarative ``(type, variant, settings)`` references in its :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Settings`, resolved by the factory at run time.
- **Dense solver path for MACIS CAS.** Complete-active-space calculations can use a dense eigensolver in addition to the iterative path.
- **Double-d-shell valence selection.** Automated valence active-space selection can optionally include the double-d-shell orbitals important for transition-metal chemistry.
- **Qubit loss and richer noise profiles.** The QDK sparse-state simulator accepts per-gate noise configuration, and :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QuantumErrorProfile` adds a qubit-loss error type.


.. _v2-breaking-changes:

Breaking Changes and Migration
==============================

.. _v2-migrating-orbitals:

Migrating ``Orbitals`` accessors
--------------------------------

Coefficients and energies are returned as symmetry-blocked tensors. Select a
spin channel with a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.symmetry.SymmetryLabel` and read
the block (for tensors) or the stored indices (for index sets) directly.

.. code-block:: python

   from qdk_chemistry.data.symmetry import SymmetryLabel, axes

   # v1 (deprecated): tuple of dense alpha/beta arrays
   alpha_c, beta_c = orbitals.get_coefficients()
   alpha_e, beta_e = orbitals.get_energies()
   alpha_active, beta_active = orbitals.get_active_space_indices()

   # v2: symmetry-blocked tensors, selected per spin channel by SymmetryLabel
   alpha = SymmetryLabel([axes.alpha()])
   beta = SymmetryLabel([axes.beta()])
   coefficients = orbitals.coefficients()          # SymmetryBlockedTensorRank2
   energies = orbitals.energies()                  # SymmetryBlockedTensorRank1
   alpha_c = coefficients.block([alpha, alpha])    # alpha block
   beta_c = coefficients.block([beta, beta])       # beta block
   alpha_e = energies.block([alpha])
   alpha_active = orbitals.active_indices().indices(alpha)

For a model (symmetry-free) system the trivial label ``SymmetryLabel([])`` selects
the single block instead of an alpha/beta label. For the common case of counting
active or inactive orbitals, take the length of the per-channel index list:

.. code-block:: python

   # v1 (deprecated)
   n_active = len(orbitals.get_active_space_indices()[0])

   # v2
   n_active = len(orbitals.active_indices().indices(SymmetryLabel([axes.alpha()])))


.. _v2-container-rename:

Consolidated container names
----------------------------

The removed container names remain importable as deprecated aliases:

.. code-block:: python

   # v1 (deprecated alias, emits DeprecationWarning)
   from qdk_chemistry.data import CasWavefunctionContainer

   # v2
   from qdk_chemistry.data import StateVectorContainer

``SlaterDeterminantContainer``, ``CasWavefunctionContainer``, and
``SciWavefunctionContainer`` map to
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.StateVectorContainer`; ``MP2Container`` and
``CoupledClusterContainer`` map to
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AmplitudeContainer`.


Two-particle RDM spin ordering (action required)
------------------------------------------------

.. warning::

   This is a silent change: the same accessor returns differently ordered data.

The spin-resolved two-particle RDM accessor
``get_active_two_rdm_spin_dependent()`` now returns its blocks as
``(aaaa, aabb, bbbb)`` (previously ``(aabb, aaaa, bbbb)``), and the ``aabb``
block is now stored in *alpha-alpha-beta-beta* index order (previously
*alpha-beta-alpha-beta*). The :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Wavefunction`
constructor takes the blocks in the same new order. Update any positional
unpacking:

.. code-block:: python

   # v1
   aabb, aaaa, bbbb = wavefunction.get_active_two_rdm_spin_dependent()

   # v2
   aaaa, aabb, bbbb = wavefunction.get_active_two_rdm_spin_dependent()


Configuration factories
-----------------------

The string and bitset constructors were replaced by explicit factory methods:

.. code-block:: python

   from qdk_chemistry.data import Configuration

   # v1
   # config = Configuration("2020")

   # v2
   config = Configuration.from_spin_half_string("2020")

The Python factories are
:meth:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Configuration.from_spin_half_string` and
:meth:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Configuration.from_bitstring`.


.. _v2-qubit-mapping:

Fermion-to-qubit mapping
------------------------

The qubit mapper no longer takes an ``encoding`` string. Build a
:class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.MajoranaMapping` and pass it to ``run()``:

.. code-block:: python

   # v1
   # mapper = create("qubit_mapper", "qdk")  # configured via encoding="jordan-wigner"
   # qubit_operator = mapper.run(hamiltonian)

   # v2
   mapping = MajoranaMapping.jordan_wigner(num_modes)
   mapper = create("qubit_mapper", "qdk")
   qubit_operator = mapper.run(hamiltonian, mapping)

The standalone ``EncodingMismatchError`` and ``validate_encoding_compatibility``
helpers were removed in favor of this mapping-centric flow; importing them still
works but emits a ``DeprecationWarning``.


.. _v2-renames:

Renamed classes and keys
------------------------

The following names changed. The former names remain importable or usable as
deprecated aliases that emit a ``DeprecationWarning``:

- ``QubitHamiltonian`` → :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator`. The class now
  represents any weighted sum of Pauli strings, not only molecular Hamiltonians.
- ``EnergyEstimator`` / ``QdkEnergyEstimator`` →
  :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.ExpectationEstimator` /
  ``QdkExpectationEstimator``, and the ``"energy_estimator"`` registry key →
  ``"expectation_estimator"``.
- The ``TimeEvolutionUnitary`` family →
  :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.UnitaryRepresentation` and
  :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.UnitaryContainer`.


Serialization format
--------------------

.. note::

   Orbitals, Hamiltonian containers, wavefunction (state-vector) data, and unitary
   representations changed serialization version and no longer load directly from
   files written by earlier releases; other schemas are unaffected. Upgrade an
   affected file with the shipped converter
   (``python -m qdk_chemistry.migrate old.hamiltonian.h5 new.hamiltonian.h5``; see
   :doc:`../user/migrating-data-files`) or re-generate it.


C++ API changes
---------------

These changes affect the C++ library directly; Python users are insulated by the
bindings above.

- The redundant private ``Hamiltonian::_to_fcidump_file`` was removed (the public
  ``Hamiltonian::to_fcidump_file(...)`` remains), and
  ``HamiltonianContainer::to_fcidump_file`` became a concrete virtual.
- The Cholesky Hamiltonian container now derives from ``HamiltonianContainer``
  (no longer from the four-center container) and its dense constructor takes
  three-center integrals plus optional AO Cholesky vectors.
- ``ModelOrbitals(size_t, bool)`` was replaced by a
  ``std::shared_ptr<const SymmetryProduct>``-based constructor and a
  ``SymmetryBlockedIndexSet``-based constructor.
- The ``NuclearDerivativeCalculator`` run signature takes a single
  ``n_inactive_orbitals`` argument in place of the earlier active-electron pair.


Deprecation Policy
==================

Deprecated v1 accessors and import aliases continue to work in this release and are
covered by tests; using them emits a ``DeprecationWarning`` (for renamed classes
such as ``QubitHamiltonian``, on construction) to flag the migration path.
They are transitional and scheduled for removal in a future release.


Bug Fixes
=========

- Fixed an ``int32`` overflow in two-body integral and RDM indexing for large
  active spaces.
- Added missing effective-core-potential (:term:`ECP`) contributions in the
  affected integral path.
- Fixed a bug in the :term:`SCF` stability checker, and a separate
  :term:`ROHF` stability-check bug in the solver.


Infrastructure and Packaging
============================

- **Windows support.** Native builds with MSVC / clang-cl via vcpkg, plus Windows CI coverage.
- **Algorithm result caching.** Passing ``cache=`` to ``run()`` content-addresses a run and returns a stored result on a hit (``FolderCache``, ``TieredCache``; ``force_rerun=True`` bypasses), enabling checkpoint/restart-style reuse across a pipeline.
- **Data-file migration tool.** ``python -m qdk_chemistry.migrate old.hamiltonian.h5 new.hamiltonian.h5`` (and ``qdk_chemistry.migrate.convert_file``) upgrade serialized files across serialization versions and between JSON and HDF5.
- **Updated backend compatibility.** Support for newer ``qdk`` (Q# 1.29+) API migrations and newer PyQIR versions.
- **Release examples bundle.** The release pipeline packages the ``examples/`` directory as a downloadable archive.
