Hamiltonian simulation
======================

The :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.time_evolution.hamiltonian_simulation.base.HamiltonianSimulation` algorithm in QDK/Chemistry simulates the time evolution of a quantum system under a time-dependent Hamiltonian and measures observable expectation values.
Following QDK/Chemistry's :doc:`algorithm design principles <../design/index>`, it takes a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.TimeDependentQubitHamiltonian`, a list of observable :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator` operators, and a state-preparation :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` as input and returns a list of :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.EnergyExpectationResult` and :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.MeasurementData` pairs.

Overview
--------

Hamiltonian simulation solves the time-dependent Schrödinger equation :math:`i\,\partial_t U = H(t)\,U` on a quantum computer.
For a Hamiltonian that changes with time — for example, a molecule driven by a laser pulse — the algorithm constructs a quantum circuit for the full evolution and then executes it to measure observable expectation values.

Circuit construction is delegated to an :doc:`EvolutionCircuitBuilder <evolution_circuit_builder>`, which handles time-stepping, propagation, and circuit-to-gates mapping.
The simulation algorithm adds circuit execution and observable measurement on top.

For resource estimation (without circuit execution), use the
:doc:`EvolutionCircuitBuilder <evolution_circuit_builder>` directly.


Using the HamiltonianSimulation
-------------------------------

.. note::
   This algorithm is currently available only in the Python API.

This section demonstrates how to create, configure, and run a Hamiltonian simulation.
The ``run`` method returns a list of tuples containing :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.EnergyExpectationResult` and :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.MeasurementData` objects — one per observable.

Input requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.time_evolution.hamiltonian_simulation.base.HamiltonianSimulation` requires the following inputs:

TimeDependentQubitHamiltonian
   A :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.TimeDependentQubitHamiltonian` describing how the Hamiltonian varies with time.

Observables
   A list of :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator` operators to measure after evolution.
   Each observable must have the same number of qubits as the Hamiltonian.

State preparation circuit
   A :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` that prepares the initial state before time evolution.
   This is typically generated by the :doc:`StatePreparation <state_preparation>` algorithm from a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Wavefunction`.

.. rubric:: Creating a simulation algorithm

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/hamiltonian_simulation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-create
      :end-before: # end-cell-create

.. rubric:: Configuring settings

Settings vary by implementation.
See `Available implementations`_ below for implementation-specific options.

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/hamiltonian_simulation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-configure
      :end-before: # end-cell-configure

.. rubric:: Running the simulation

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/hamiltonian_simulation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-run
      :end-before: # end-cell-run


Available implementations
-------------------------

QDK/Chemistry's :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.time_evolution.hamiltonian_simulation.base.HamiltonianSimulation` provides a unified interface for time-dependent simulation methods.
You can discover available implementations programmatically:

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/hamiltonian_simulation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-list-implementations
      :end-before: # end-cell-list-implementations

Euler integrator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rubric:: Factory name: ``"euler_integrator"``

The Euler integrator delegates circuit construction to an
:doc:`EulerEvolutionCircuitBuilder <evolution_circuit_builder>`, then
executes the resulting circuit and measures each observable independently
using the configured expectation estimator.

The circuit builder handles all time-stepping, propagation, and circuit
mapping.  See :doc:`EvolutionCircuitBuilder <evolution_circuit_builder>`
for details on how the evolution circuit is constructed.

.. rubric:: Settings

Direct settings on :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.time_evolution.hamiltonian_simulation.base.HamiltonianSimulationSettings`:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Setting
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``evolution_circuit_builder``
     - :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AlgorithmRef`
     - Evolution circuit builder used to construct the state-prep + evolution circuit. Default: :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AlgorithmRef` to ``"evolution_circuit_builder"`` with method ``"euler"``.
   * - ``circuit_executor``
     - :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AlgorithmRef`
     - Circuit executor used to run quantum circuits. Default: :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AlgorithmRef` to ``"circuit_executor"`` with method ``"qdk_sparse_state_simulator"``.
   * - ``observable_estimator``
     - :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AlgorithmRef`
     - Estimator used to compute observable expectation values. Default: :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.AlgorithmRef` to ``"expectation_estimator"`` with method ``"qdk"``.

Nested algorithm configuration (via ``evolution_circuit_builder``):

See :doc:`EvolutionCircuitBuilder <evolution_circuit_builder>` for configuring:

- ``total_time`` — Total evolution time
- ``dt`` — Time step size
- ``propagator`` — Propagator for computing effective Hamiltonians
- ``evolution_builder`` — Unitary builder (e.g., Trotter)
- ``circuit_mapper`` — Circuit compilation strategy


Related classes
---------------

- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.TimeDependentQubitHamiltonian`: Input time-dependent Hamiltonian
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitOperator`: Observable operators
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit`: State-preparation circuit and output evolution circuit
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.EnergyExpectationResult`: Output energy expectation values
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.MeasurementData`: Output measurement data
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.time_evolution.evolution_circuit_builder.base.EvolutionCircuitBuilder`: Constructs the evolution circuit

Further reading
---------------

- The above examples can be downloaded as a complete `Python <../../../_static/examples/python/hamiltonian_simulation.py>`_ script.
- :doc:`EvolutionCircuitBuilder <evolution_circuit_builder>`: Time-evolution circuit composition
- :doc:`Propagator <propagator>`: Effective Hamiltonians for time-dependent evolution
- :doc:`HamiltonianUnitaryBuilder <hamiltonian_unitary_builder>`: Constructs the time-evolution unitary from the effective Hamiltonian
- :doc:`ExpectationEstimator <expectation_estimator>`: Observable expectation value estimation
- :doc:`CircuitExecutor <circuit_executor>`: Quantum circuit execution backends
- :doc:`Settings <settings>`: Configuration settings for algorithms
- :doc:`Factory Pattern <factory_pattern>`: Understanding algorithm creation
