Phase estimation
================

The :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.PhaseEstimation` algorithm in QDK/Chemistry extracts eigenvalues from a quantum state by measuring the phase accumulated under repeated application of a unitary operator.
Following QDK/Chemistry's :doc:`algorithm design principles <../design/index>`, it takes a state-preparation :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` (from :doc:`StatePreparation <state_preparation>`), a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitHamiltonian` (from :doc:`QubitMapper <qubit_mapper>` or a :doc:`model Hamiltonian <../model_hamiltonians>`), a unitary builder (e.g., :doc:`UnitaryBuilder <unitary_builder>`), a :doc:`ControlledCircuitMapper <circuit_mapper>`, and a :doc:`CircuitExecutor <circuit_executor>` as input and returns a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QpeResult` containing the measured phase, reconstructed energy, and alias-resolution metadata.

Overview
--------

Quantum Phase Estimation (:term:`QPE`) is one of the foundational quantum algorithms for chemistry.
Given a unitary :math:`U` and an initial state :math:`|\psi\rangle` that has significant overlap with an eigenstate of :math:`U`, :term:`QPE` measures the eigenphase :math:`\phi` such that :math:`U|\psi\rangle = e^{2\pi i \phi}|\psi\rangle`.
For chemistry applications the unitary is typically the Hamiltonian time-evolution operator :math:`U = e^{-iHt}`, in which case the energy eigenvalue is recovered as :math:`E = 2\pi\phi / t`.
However, the algorithm itself is agnostic to how the unitary is constructed — any operator whose eigenvalues encode the quantity of interest can be used.

QDK/Chemistry provides two :term:`QPE` approaches, each suited to different hardware constraints:

Iterative Quantum Phase Estimation (:term:`IQPE`)
   Kitaev's single-ancilla algorithm :cite:`Kitaev1995` that extracts phase bits one at a time, from most significant to least significant, using adaptive feedback corrections between iterations.
   This approach minimizes ancilla requirements and is particularly suited to near-term hardware.

Standard QFT-based Quantum Phase Estimation
   The textbook multi-ancilla approach :cite:`Nielsen-Chuang2010-QPE` that uses a register of :math:`n` ancilla qubits and an inverse Quantum Fourier Transform to extract all phase bits simultaneously.
   This approach achieves all precision bits in a single circuit execution but requires more ancilla qubits and longer circuit depth.

Both implementations share the same interface and produce :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QpeResult` objects with automatic phase-wrapping, energy alias detection, and full :doc:`serialization <../data/serialization>` support.
See :doc:`../data/qpe_result` for details on the result data class.

.. _qpe-workflow:

Typical workflow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A complete :term:`QPE` workflow connects several stages of the QDK/Chemistry pipeline.
The most common path starts from a molecular system:

1. Prepare a reference :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Wavefunction` from a :doc:`multi-configuration calculation <mc_calculator>`
2. Generate a state-preparation :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` using :doc:`StatePreparation <state_preparation>`
3. Map the molecular :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Hamiltonian` to qubit operators using :doc:`QubitMapper <qubit_mapper>`
4. Choose a method for constructing the target unitary (currently, QDK/Chemistry provides :doc:`time-evolution builders <unitary_builder>` for Hamiltonian simulation)
5. Run phase estimation to obtain the energy eigenvalue

Alternatively, phase estimation can be used with :doc:`model Hamiltonians <../model_hamiltonians>` (e.g., Hubbard, Heisenberg, or Ising spin models) or with a user-supplied :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` and :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitHamiltonian` directly — the full molecular-structure pipeline is not required.


Using the PhaseEstimation
-------------------------

.. note::
   This algorithm is currently available only in the Python API.

This section demonstrates how to create, configure, and run a phase estimation calculation.
The ``run`` method returns a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QpeResult` containing the measured phase, energy, alias candidates, and measurement metadata.

Input requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.PhaseEstimation` requires the following inputs:

State preparation circuit
   A :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` that prepares the target quantum state on the system register.
   This is typically generated by the :doc:`StatePreparation <state_preparation>` algorithm from a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Wavefunction`, but can also be any user-constructed circuit (e.g., a custom initial state for a :doc:`model Hamiltonian <../model_hamiltonians>`).

QubitHamiltonian
   A :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitHamiltonian` containing the Pauli-string representation of the Hamiltonian.
   This can be obtained from the :doc:`QubitMapper <qubit_mapper>` algorithm, constructed from a :doc:`model Hamiltonian <../model_hamiltonians>`, or built directly by the user.

Unitary builder
   An algorithm that constructs the unitary operator :math:`U` whose eigenphase is to be measured.
   For chemistry applications this is typically a :doc:`UnitaryBuilder <unitary_builder>` that approximates :math:`U(t) = e^{-iHt}`.
   The builder produces a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.UnitaryRepresentation` which is then converted to a controlled circuit.

ControlledCircuitMapper
   Converts a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.UnitaryRepresentation` into a *controlled* version and synthesises it as an executable :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit`.
   The default implementation (``"pauli_sequence"``) constructs controlled Pauli rotations from a :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.PauliProductFormulaContainer`.
   See :doc:`circuit_mapper` for details.

CircuitExecutor
   A backend that executes :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit` objects and returns measurement bitstrings as :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.CircuitExecutorData`.
   QDK/Chemistry ships native Q# simulators (sparse-state and full-state, with optional :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QuantumErrorProfile` noise modelling) and integrates with Qiskit's Aer simulator through the :doc:`plugin system <../plugins>`.
   See :doc:`circuit_executor` for details.

.. note::

   The state preparation circuit and qubit Hamiltonian must be compatible — they should use the same qubit encoding and be derived from the same underlying system.

.. rubric:: Creating a phase estimation algorithm

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/phase_estimation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-create
      :end-before: # end-cell-create

.. rubric:: Configuring settings

Settings vary by implementation.
See `Available implementations`_ below for implementation-specific options.

.. tab:: Python API (Iterative)

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/phase_estimation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-configure-iqpe
      :end-before: # end-cell-configure-iqpe

.. tab:: Python API (Standard)

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/phase_estimation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-configure-standard
      :end-before: # end-cell-configure-standard

.. rubric:: Running the calculation

Once configured, the :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.PhaseEstimation` can be executed with all required dependencies:

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/phase_estimation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-run
      :end-before: # end-cell-run

Available implementations
-------------------------

QDK/Chemistry's :class:`~qdk_chemistry.algorithms.PhaseEstimation` provides a unified interface for phase estimation methods.
You can discover available implementations programmatically:

.. tab:: Python API

   .. literalinclude:: ../../../_static/examples/python/phase_estimation.py
      :language: python
      :start-after: # start-cell-list-implementations
      :end-before: # end-cell-list-implementations

.. _iqpe-algorithm:

Iterative phase estimation (IQPE)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rubric:: Factory name: ``"iterative"``

Kitaev's iterative algorithm :cite:`Kitaev1995` uses a single ancilla qubit to extract phase bits sequentially, from the most significant bit (MSB) to the least significant bit (LSB).
At each iteration :math:`k` (from :math:`0` to :math:`n-1`, where :math:`n` is the total number of bits):

1. Prepare the ancilla in :math:`|+\rangle`
2. Apply the controlled evolution :math:`C\text{-}U^{2^{n-k-1}}` between the ancilla and the system register
3. Apply a phase correction :math:`R_z(-\Phi_k)` based on previously measured bits
4. Measure the ancilla to determine bit :math:`k`

The phase feedback is updated using Kitaev's recursion:

.. math::

   \Phi_{k} = \frac{\Phi_{k+1}}{2} + \frac{\pi \cdot b_k}{2}

where :math:`b_k` is the measured bit.
Each bit is determined by a majority vote over multiple circuit executions (controlled by ``shots_per_bit``).

.. rubric:: Settings

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Setting
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``num_bits``
     - int
     - Number of phase bits to extract. More bits yield higher energy precision.
   * - ``evolution_time``
     - float
     - Time parameter :math:`t` in :math:`U = e^{-iHt}`. Determines the energy scale: :math:`E = 2\pi\phi / t`.
   * - ``shots_per_bit``
     - int
     - Number of circuit executions per bit, used for majority-vote determination. Default is 3.


.. _standard-qpe-algorithm:

Standard QFT-based phase estimation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. rubric:: Factory name: ``"qiskit_standard"``

The standard :term:`QPE` algorithm :cite:`Nielsen-Chuang2010-QPE` uses a register of :math:`n` ancilla qubits to extract all phase bits simultaneously.
The circuit structure consists of:

1. Initialize :math:`n` ancilla qubits in :math:`|+\rangle`
2. For each ancilla qubit :math:`j \in \{0, \ldots, n-1\}`, apply the controlled evolution :math:`C\text{-}U^{2^j}`
3. Apply an inverse Quantum Fourier Transform (iQFT) to the ancilla register
4. Measure all ancilla qubits

The phase is extracted from the dominant bitstring in the measurement results.

.. rubric:: Settings

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 15 60

   * - Setting
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``num_bits``
     - int
     - Number of ancilla qubits (phase register size). More bits yield higher energy precision.
   * - ``evolution_time``
     - float
     - Time parameter :math:`t` in :math:`U = e^{-iHt}`. Determines the energy scale.
   * - ``shots``
     - int
     - Total measurement shots for the full circuit. Default is 3.
   * - ``qft_do_swaps``
     - bool
     - Whether to include the final swap layer in the inverse QFT. Default is True.


Phase aliasing and energy resolution
-------------------------------------

Because phase estimation measures a phase :math:`\phi \in [0, 1)`, the reconstructed energy :math:`E = 2\pi\phi / t` is only unique modulo :math:`2\pi / t`.
This means several energy values — called *aliases* — can produce the same measured phase.

QDK/Chemistry handles this automatically in the :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QpeResult` data class:

- ``branching`` contains the full list of alias energy candidates :math:`E + k \cdot 2\pi/t` for :math:`k \in \{-2, -1, 0, 1, 2\}` by default
- If a ``reference_energy`` is provided (e.g., the :term:`CASCI` energy), the alias closest to the reference is selected as ``resolved_energy``
- ``canonical_phase_fraction`` and ``canonical_phase_angle`` reflect the alias-resolved phase

See :doc:`../data/qpe_result` for the full data class documentation.


Related classes
---------------

- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QpeResult`: Output data class containing phase, energy, and alias information
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QubitHamiltonian`: Input qubit Hamiltonian
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.Circuit`: State-preparation circuit from :doc:`StatePreparation <state_preparation>`
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.UnitaryRepresentation`: Output of :doc:`UnitaryBuilder <unitary_builder>`
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.CircuitExecutorData`: Measurement results from :doc:`CircuitExecutor <circuit_executor>`
- :class:`~qdk_chemistry.data.QuantumErrorProfile`: Noise model for noisy simulation

Further reading
---------------

- The above examples can be downloaded as a complete `Python <../../../_static/examples/python/phase_estimation.py>`_ script.
- :doc:`UnitaryBuilder <unitary_builder>`: Hamiltonian simulation via Trotter-Suzuki decomposition
- :doc:`CircuitExecutor <circuit_executor>`: Quantum circuit execution backends
- :doc:`ControlledCircuitMapper <circuit_mapper>`: Controlled-unitary circuit synthesis
- :doc:`StatePreparation <state_preparation>`: Load wavefunctions onto qubits as quantum circuits
- :doc:`QubitMapper <qubit_mapper>`: Map fermionic Hamiltonians to qubit operators
- :doc:`QpeResult <../data/qpe_result>`: Phase estimation result data class
- See the ``examples/qpe_stretched_n2.ipynb`` notebook for a complete end-to-end :term:`QPE` workflow
- :doc:`Settings <settings>`: Configuration settings for algorithms
- :doc:`Factory Pattern <factory_pattern>`: Understanding algorithm creation
